>> Hello and welcome to the Haskell Weekly podcast. As
you might have guessed this show is about Haskell,
a purely functional programming language. I'm
your host Taylor Fausak and with me today
is Cameron Gera. Welcome Cam. >> Hey how's it
going man? >> It's going good. It's been a while.
It has yeah. I was looking and it's been
about a year since we've done a podcast. So
really glad to be back with you and
just give all of our viewers some
new content to listen to.
>> So just a little off of our weekly schedule but we're getting there.
And we're coming back at an exciting time because
it's October which means it's Hacktoberfest.
And I understood that you found an interesting
repo for Haskell Hacktoberfest shenanigans. Can
you tell us about it? >> Yeah yeah so you know
Hacktoberfest is an opportunity for us to
all contribute to the open source world and to
contribute to public repos and create PRs against
these public repos. So you put four
PRs together and get those submitted
and you're going to get a t-shirt. And so with
this new project that I'm going to be talking
about we're going to be able to do that and learn
Haskell at the same time. So funny enough the name
is Learn4Haskell. So it's an opportunity to kind of --
>> With a number four in the middle: Learn4Haskell
>> Exactly
4 Haskell yeah. And you know we're gonna provide
the link for you there's gonna be two places:
in the show notes you can check that out and also
on this week's edition of Haskell Weekly which
Taylor could you remind me what version we're on?
>> Oh that's a good question. We're on version 232
I think >> Wow so 232 weeks you've been doing
this >> Yeah that's a lot of weeks almost four
years ... four, five years? I can't do math >> Well hey
we're super thankful you've taken on that
project and you know now we're spinning it
out a little bit more doing some more podcasting
>> Yeah man so yeah look for that link to
Learn4Haskell in the show notes and if you're
interested in Hacktoberfest but maybe not
interested in Haskell then I wonder what are
you doing listening to this podcast but you can go
to hacktoberfest.com and read more about it there
>> Yep awesome man well I mean without further
ado i think we should kind of dive into our
subject for the day huh >> I agree and today
we're going to be looking at a blog post
called "Strategic Deriving". It comes to us via
Kowainik and it's authored by Veronika Romashkina
and Dmitrii Kovanikov and I'm sure I butchered
their names so I apologize in advance for that.
But yeah this is a post talking about how deriving
works in Haskell and why you might want to use it.
>> Yeah I think that's awesome and
you know I want to give a shout out to
these two authors they did a
very thorough job on this post
and so you know I'm glad we can kind of you know
just use it as a jumping off point because there's
a lot of content in it so you know feel free
to find the article and check it out yourself.
But for us yeah we're super excited to talk
about it. So Taylor what's the big idea?
>> The big idea is that we can avoid writing
a bunch of boilerplate and we can have the
compiler do the work for us and prove that it's
correct. And this is super convenient because
it'll save us a bunch of typing and it'll make us
feel more confident in the code that we produce.
But as you mentioned this blog
post is -- it's a giant resource and it's great
but there's so much here that we're just
going to start scratching the surface on it and
if you're listening to this and you think
it sounds interesting I encourage you to
go read it. We'll put the link in the show
notes. It is very thorough, very good resource.
>> Yeah so you know we're talking about deriving.
You know we have these type classes in Haskell
that offer us you know some out of the box
functions and functionality for different types.
You know what are some of the pros and cons of
deriving? I know you kind of mentioned a little bit
but can you go a little more detail? >> For sure. To
me the main pro to deriving -- and when we talk about
pros and cons here we're going to be contrasting
it with writing these instances by hand -- and for me
the biggest pro with deriving is that it reduces
the amount of code that you have to write. It
reduces boilerplate. So I think the typical example
is like a show instance where maybe you defined a
record and it has a bunch of fields on it and
if you wanted to write a show instance by hand
you would have to write out all of those field
names and then write show that field name of
that record. And if your record has you know
20 fields on it all of a sudden that becomes
20 more lines of code that you have to maintain
and keep in sync with that data type. It's just --
it's no fun. It's no fun to write that. >> Yeah and
I know from personal experience we've had some
of those issues where you know we've added a
new field to a record and we didn't update a JSON
instance and you know we went through PR
and it ended up into production and people were
like "hey where's this field" you know because
they were relying on that being there and then it
would you know create issues for us that we'd
have to you know jump to resolve >> Right yeah
it makes our job harder because we can't
rely on the compiler to tell us that our instance
matches our type declaration or you know the
record we're defining. And like you're saying
leaving out fields is a super common one. And if
you have a bunch of instances -- you mentioned JSON.
So like if you define a data type you have
to define how that thing can be parsed from
JSON how it can be converted to JSON. And if you
have other formats that you convert in and out
of those are listed as well. So like BSON or YAML
or to the database or you know Protobufs, whatever
you're using. If you have all of those suddenly you
have all this code to maintain. So you go update
one little field and GHC says "yeah I'm happy"
but you forgot to update it in 10 other places.
>> Yeah that that's definitely one big downside to
you know deriving your own instances and not
using deriving >> Yeah downside to writing them
by hand upside to deriving sorry yeah upside
to deriving >> yeah sorry i flipped the pro con list
there i apologize but yeah so the -- yeah and
another one that you know I've run into a few
times and kind of been baffled when you know my
code crashes and my everything
kind of freezes on it is because
i've created a you know infinitely recursive
instance that's not properly translated and
the compiler says "yeah you're good" but you
know it doesn't detect or see that you know
infinite recursive bit of code >> Yeah and to
give a kind of more concrete example of this
if you're defining like a JSON instance
for something that's a newtype wrapper
what you probably want to do is remove the
newtype so like unwrap it and then call toJSON on
the thing on the inside but what you might
accidentally do is forget to unwrap it and just
call toJSON directly and that's actually going
to type check because you are defining an instance
for how to convert this thing to JSON but then in
your instance you're using you're calling itself
over and over again and GHC won't catch this error
and you'll be mystified in production like we're
seeing 100 cpu usage why is that everything passed
the tests everything pass code review well hopefully
it doesn't pass the tests but the compiler
was happy >> Yeah exactly and that's you know
great thing for tests we can always be
about plugging tests here at Haskell Weekly
yeah and you know another nice one and I
kind of think you've touched on it but like
you know you've got consistency you know between
different modules different types there's you
know a consistent code feel right so you know
you look at a type and you've seen all the
record accessors and then you say oh yeah let me
see what instances it has and it's right there
easy to see easy to understand so i
really think that's a nice pro for
this deriving tool >> I agree i think there are two
parts to this even where on the one hand you have
across your code base as people get acclimated to
it you can look at a data type and just know what
all of the instances are going to look like so for
instance again with JSON using it as an example
maybe for every field you make all the characters
lowercase and put hyphens between the words
for the field names and you can just look at the
record declaration and see oh this field is called
whatever it is and i know that when it gets
converted to JSON it's going to look like this
instead you don't have to actually read through
the instance to see how it's doing any of those
conversions and then the other side of this
is that by using deriving like visually the
amount of code that you have to parse in order
to understand which instances are provided
is very little you can see deriving ToJSON FromJSON
Show Eq Generic Ord rather than having you know
50 lines of code with five different instances
there you can just read it all in one line
>> Yeah i think that's a super big benefit and
you know really helps you know just keep that
code more maintainable I
mean that's that's the big thing
yeah so you know we've heard a lot of pros
you know there is a lot of good reasons
but to use deriving but there's also you know
some some drawbacks more cons as you will
you know so what are some of those >> yeah
it's not all roses with deriving unfortunately
one of the the ones that we run into frequently
and i should probably specify that for you and me
cam we're working on a Haskell application at ITProTV
day in day out so most of our experience is
colored by that we don't maintain many open source
libraries we mostly focus on this one application
so some of these things are more applicable to
apps versus libs but just so everyone knows
where our biases are but yeah one of the downsides
for us with deriving is that as soon as you want
to do something a little bit different then you
have to kind of scrap all of the deriving stuff
and go back to doing it completely manually and
again to keep using JSON as an example here imagine
that for any API that we get to define we use our
lowercase letters with hyphens between the words
scheme but we have to integrate with a third party
and they wrote their thing in C# and it wants
camel cased words so when we want to talk to them
we can't use that derived type anymore we have to
write it ourselves manually >> Right so that leads
to that special case right that's that one special
case that kind of pokes a hole in in easy deriving
which is definitely a bummer
yeah and i think another thing too with
this deriving is that it can be a little
unclear what an instance does because the
code's not right there right you you need to go
to you know Stackage or Hackage or Hoogle and find
you know what the definition of this type class
and these functions are >> Yeah and this is where
you know in a language like Go something that
proponents of that language go to a lot
is that you can look at the code and see
pretty clearly what it's doing there's
not a whole lot there to surprise you
but with deriving the whole point is that there's
nothing there it's all abstracted away so if you
don't already know what it does there's not really
anything to guide you into guessing what it does
>> Right so but I mean in my opinion I don't find
it that bad to you know oh I'm not sure what this
you know very specific type classes doing let
me go check out the functions and see what the
type definitions are you know i think the
documentation in Haskell is good enough to check
that out and figure it out you know >> I agree
and typically there aren't that many type
classes that you're working with so as you get
you know introduced to a code base you're probably
going to become familiar with those type classes
and then you'll get a feeling for how they're
implemented by default >> Right yeah so you know
what is the performance impact of using this
abstraction level or abstraction level excuse
me >> Yeah this is actually something I've spent
a lot of time looking at and i can leave a
couple links in the show notes to blog posts
I've written that look at the performance of
various methods of dealing with this boilerplate
but the short version is that deriving
specifically through generics which is what
this blog post spends a lot of time talking
about is one of the slowest methods to compile
which is unfortunate because it has a lot of other
really nice benefits and when i say one of the
slowest what i mean is in comparison to writing
the instance by hand or deriving it via Template
Haskell which is essentially code generation at
compile time using generic deriving is going
to be slower than either of those methods but
clearly there are other upsides and so it's up to
the people writing the code to decide is it worth
you know taking an extra second per instance
declaration this is just a fake number I don't
know how long extra it would be you would have
to run your own benchmarks but is it
worth taking a little extra time in order to
you know get these other pros that we
talked about at the top of the show
>> Right yeah yeah i think that's you know
a good thing to consider when
you're working within a team and
you know you're kind of focused on oh hey like
you know we want to be as performant as possible
you know we want to keep our compile times down
like oh this is a side effect of you know deriving
you know and generic deriving you know so that's
something to consider for us we're like yeah let's
do it you know less boilerplate less you
know yeah I mean as someone who's come from
using both you know instance deriving and you know
this deriving feature that you know you can do
you know we've experienced a lot of the tensions
of the instance deriving whereas you know and
we've really been making a concerted effort to
moving towards you know just regular old deriving
>> Yeah and there are definitely ways to lessen the
impact of the performance penalty you take with
generic deriving Matt Parsons has a good blog
post talking about how to keep your builds fast
and for the most part it comes down to keeping
modules small and putting types in their own
modules and we've been trying to do that as we
move to more generic deriving in our code base
>> Right right you know so we've got one more
con here you know what's so difficult
you know about deriving you know a type class
that allows deriving or writing a type class that
allows deriving >> Yeah so using JSON as our go to
example um when you're using a library like Aeson
it provides this whole mechanism for you so you
have your choice is to opt into using deriving but
providing that option to other people can be a
challenge because you have to rely on the generic
machinery that GHC provides you and that can be
a little different or a lot different than your
day-to-day programming and i feel like it's
important to contrast this with the alternatives
so with Template Haskell you could write as
essentially something that parses a Haskell
data declaration and produces some instance
declaration from that which is not actually
but you could think of it as being a textual
like search and replace if you see this do this
or in your documentation you could provide you
know this is what an instance normally looks like
copy paste it and change some stuff around to
do the generic deriving you have to understand
how generics are represented in you know Haskell
level values how to connect all these type classes
together and these things aren't insurmountable
problems but they are a barrier to clear and I
think kind of the silver lining here is that it's
pretty uncommon to define new type classes that
need generic deriving and if you do need to do
that there are good resources for doing it either
you can go crib from another library that does
it already or there are some recent talks about
you know how does the generic type representation
what does it look like and how do you work with it
>> Right yeah and i think you know reading and
understanding what was happening in this blog
post you know you hit you know this section about
the generics and what it looks like under the
covers and you're like ah like you just wanna you
know put those down and you know not look anymore
because it's just you know there's a lot going
on there and i think you know it kind of proves
how powerful you know Haskell can be but it
obviously takes you know a little bit of you know
thought and brain power to kind of parse
those you know what that's actually doing
well yeah so we've got you know different
types of deriving correct is that a
thing i think they're called strategies right
>> yeah i don't remember which version of GHC
introduced them but there's this new concept of
deriving strategies or it's not actually a new
concept but it used to be implicit and now it's
explicit and the strategies there are four of
them one of them is stock and what stock means
is this is a type class that the Haskell report
like the spec for the language has defined how
it should behave so it's only a handful of them
and they're the stuff that you're familiar with
like Show and Eq and Read and that kind of stuff
>> and Ix everybody knows Ix >> Ix can't forget
Ix and then there's also newtype which
you may be familiar with through the GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving
language extension and newtype
deriving lets you kind of delegate your instance
to the type that you're wrapping around so for
instance if you have like a user ID type that is a
wrapper around an int newtype deriving would just
effectively just say use the int instance
for whatever type class I'm deriving here
and then the last two strategies are anyclass
and via and any class is the one that
powers this generic deriving stuff where there is
typically going to be a default implementation
of the type class methods and those
default implementations are going to be
powered by a generic representation of the type
and then via kind of piggybacks on the other three
but what it does is it lets you define your
type class instance through another type so
you kind of like conceptually wrap up the
type you're dealing with in this other
type that you're deriving via and then the
instance will be generated based on that one
i feel like i'm doing a poor job explaining
exactly what it is but it's a very powerful
tool very neat you should check it out >> Yeah
yeah we we've started to use this a little bit
in our day to day and it's really saved us a lot
of time and effort from having to write instances
with you know with Swagger so we you know use
servant and swagger more recently and that's
something that you know we Taylor did a lot of
effort on creating this type that would allow
us to not have to do so much boilerplate and
so we're very thankful for that and it kind of
gave us the opportunity to kind of learn more
about via >> Yeah and this is a good way to come back
to the pros we were talking about earlier
because we've been using JSON as an example
over and over again and once you bring Swagger
into the picture which is like automated API
documentation you're going to want the shape of
your JSON data as part of that API documentation
and by using derived instances for this stuff
you can make sure that your JSON instance and
the documentation for that JSON instance actually
match each other rather than writing them by hand
and potentially having a mismatch there >> Right
yeah it saves us a ton of time and it's it's great
question why don't we really see when we're
deriving like this need to define exactly what
strategy we're using >> So normally GHC will pick
a strategy for you and like i said earlier
in the past it has always
been implicit and then in some
relatively recent version of GHC they give you
the ability to explicitly specify the strategy
so for instance when you do deriving
Show that's always going to be stock but
if you turn on this deriving strategies extension
you could instead say deriving newtype Show
and the difference there would be that the you
know stringified representation of that type
would no longer include the newtype
wrapper's name like it normally does
that would be stripped out because you're going
to be using the inner types instance directly
but to answer your question normally it is
implicit and then you can make it explicit and
for us the normal way that we make it explicit
is by using deriving via which is one of the
strategies >> Right right right yeah I found
that bit cool when they talked about how
you can explicitly say yes we're going to use
newtype deriving here and it's you know for
the show instance you know it's going to take away
that type wrapper within the stringified version
I thought that was pretty neat
because you know obviously
you know Show is a great resource and you know
or a great type class that allows you really to
debug and understand what's happening in your
code but sometimes the output can be a little bit
daunting because it's so you know if you have
large records or a list of records it's kind of
hard to parse what's going on and so you
know being able to like maybe remove some of that
you know complexity it could be nice >> Yeah
a good example from our code base is that
we use UUIDs for some of our unique identifiers
but we have an internal type that we wrap around
UUIDs that we call a GUID and then we wrap
domain specific types around that one so we
have like a user ID is a wrapper around
a GUID which is a wrapper around a UUID
so by default when you show that you'll get the
literal text user ID parentheses GUID parentheses
UUID parentheses and then the and then the thing
you're actually interested in right and by using
newtype deriving at each step of the way you
could strip out those things and just get the ID
>> Yeah I mean I would be curious to see how you know
our team felt about doing something like that
you know obviously we don't have to use Show too
too much but when we do you know that would be a
really nice thing for the instances where we have
a very nested type >> Yeah because you can lose kind
of the overall shape of the data you're looking at
when there are too many details included like that
>> Yeah well awesome thank you for you know kind of
talking about the strategies a little bit you know
for me it's this has all been
a learning experience kind of
you know obviously I've used deriving and
I've you know derived specific instances but
you know kind of the mechanics behind it were
really kind of cool and neat to learn about
>> Yeah I agree >> Yeah so we've got a couple more minutes here
and i just want to kind of touch real quick on
some of the best practices they mentioned
and then you know we'll wrap it up but
you know trying to be cognizant of
our viewers time >> Listeners, maybe they're viewers too
>> Glad you're on board with us but
we don't want to bore you to death
>> But yeah so some of the best practices so the
one that they touch on first I think you could
talk about a little about always deriving the
Show and Eq type classes why do you want
to do that >> Yeah I mean it helps you know working
in in the REPL you know if you're trying to
you know see what an output is going to be you're
going to need a Show instance so it can display
you know and also testing you know you're
generally going to have to kind of see what's
happening see what the mechanics of your code are
doing and see what the types are along the way
so I think that's you know some of the real pros
to that but one of the cons being you know you
have to be cognizant of maybe a type that you
don't want publicly shared like a password or
you know a token you know and if you do want to
still have Show instances as well as you just
be cognizant to make a custom instance for that
that you know redacts the sensitive information
>> Yeah and this can be a somewhat tricky decision
of do I want to provide a show instance that hides
the information or do I want to not provide a
show instance at all and for us the way that
we typically lean is like using password as an
example let's go ahead and provide an instance
for it but the only thing that it outputs is
going to be like the word redacted and that way
if we have a record that includes a password
within it we can still show that record
and see kind of the overall shape of it but we're
not going to leak any of that sensitive data
if you go the other way and don't include the
instance at all then if your user type has
a password on it you can no longer show
a user which to us is super frustrating
>> Yeah and I mean and if you're
dealing with maybe some smaller types
you know you can always kind of create your
own function that turns that type into a string
that can easily be shown or you know turn it
into another type that has a show instance but
you know i think you know what you said about
kind of creating your own so you can then
use it in a larger record and and have a show and
since for the larger record i think it
makes a big deal yeah so i mean at that point
you know they kind of talked about you know
deriving generics do you have anything
kind of add on that as a best practice
>> Yeah so as I mentioned we are mostly focused
on application development so for us the choice of
do we add a generic instance or not really comes
down to are we using that generic instance but for
library authors the question is different because
whether or not you use it in your code base
or in your library I should say if any of your
users are going to need that instance then you
have to provide it so more often than not
if you're defining custom data types in your
library that other people are supposed to use you
probably should have generic instances on them and
I just want to touch on earlier I also mentioned
how generic deriving can be slower than other
other ways to provide instances and that's
true but providing a generic instance by itself
is very quick it's when you start to use it that
things slow down a little bit so if you're afraid
of providing generic instances for performance
reasons I would say don't be afraid of
that go ahead and provide it >> Persevere and
go through strong you've got this >> For sure
>> Well awesome well hey I really appreciate you
kind of you know talking through this post a
little bit from you know a high level obviously
if you want more detail you know go read the post
kind of dive in because you know you're going to
really be able to you know kind of walk away with
you know kind of a new understanding of what's
happening behind the scenes at least at least I
did so I mean I think that's about
it >> Cam thank you for bringing this post you know
to my attention and really taking the time to
dig into it it's always nice to get a deeper
understanding of something that we use day in and
out but haven't really had the reason to go look
into the intricacies >> Exactly yeah I mean you're
welcome you know I I've I'm obviously you know
honestly just can trying to continue to learn
you know as an engineer like that's our job
obviously yes your job is to code but you know
if you don't learn and adapt and kind of figure
out something new every day you're gonna you know
you're gonna get past real quick so you know I'm
definitely always looking for stuff um you know
and I would like to actually invite maybe
some of our viewers if they have a pod you know
well a podcast if they want but like a blog post
that they you know really enjoy you know feel
free to send it to us you know and we would
love to you know talk about it look at it
review it you know and spread the word per se
you know what would be a good way for them
to send that if they were interested >> So for our
listeners if they have something that they want
us to do a deep dive on do a podcast episode on
you can reach out to Haskell Weekly via email
which is going to be info@HaskellWeekly.news
or you can hit us up on Twitter our Twitter handle
is @HaskellWeekly shouldn't be any surprises there
or if you find me or Cameron on you know Reddit
Twitter wherever we can take suggestions there
as well >> Yep >> Yeah so I think that will do it for
us today thank you for listening this has
been a little longer than our normal podcasts but
this has been you know a really solid resource
that we've been able to chew through and we
wanted to do it justice so thank you Cam for
hanging out with me I appreciate it >> Always
man always >> And thank you again for listening
if you would like to find out more about Haskell
Weekly please go to our website HaskellWeekly.news
and once you're there you can subscribe to
the newsletter which goes out every week or
you can subscribe to this podcast which comes out
either every week or about once a year depending
>> Yeah and you know and and also feel free to follow
us on Twitter you know >> Twitter Reddit
everywhere >> We are everywhere >> Alright thanks
so much y'all happy hacking >> Happy hacking